What is civic technology, and how can Smart Cities benefit from it? 

Civic technology broadly encompasses uses of digital resources to prepare, 
implement, and evaluate public programs, policies, and infrastructure. Because
so many people have access to the internet and use web-based applications on a 
regular basis, technologies like geolocation, videoconferencing, real-time 
polling, encrypted payment platforms, and databases have reduced the time and 
expenses associated with travelling to offices, speaking on the phone with 
representatives, or printing and manually filling out forms. 

While civic technology has been a boon to civic participation in many ways, 
making it easier for people to file their taxes, research candidates for public 
office, and report concerns about problems, it also has been accompanied by 
problems. Many civic technologies are developed and managed by private 
corporations, whose profit motive leads products to be significantly more 
expensive to the public than they probably should be in many cases. 
Additionally, civic technology the has the capacity to be used for 
hypersurveillance, particularly in ways that unjustly targets people who are 
Black and brown, women, and queer. It is important for technologists and users 
to be considerate of how the projects and products that they contribute to and
interact with negatively affect or unfairly exclude people and - to the extent
that they are able - advocate for better systems and tools when they see 
problems. 

"Smart" cities are those whose governments and residents leverage technology to
make daily operations more efficient from the standpoints of cost, time, energy,
or other finite resources. UC Riverside has a great blog piece that discusses 
how "smart" electricity grids can save consumers money, reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, and prevent power outages, for example. The City of Phoenix has a 
passive pedestrian and cyclist detection system that customizes signals based on
the presence or absence of active transporatation users, as well as by the types
of active transportation used in a given traffic flow. Unfortunately, some 
amenities that are deemed "smart" are not actually very smart at all in the 
sense of serving the purposes advertised by their creator. A classic example in 
Chicago is that of ShotSpotter, which is activated by many loud noises that 
other than gunshots, leading to an unnecessarily high police presence in the 
places where ShotSpotter sensors are placed. The lesson is clear: introducing an
app or robot to a situation doesn't improve conditions from the status quo, and
can, in fact, make bad situations worse.

References:

UC Riverside blog post
https://engineeringonline.ucr.edu/blog/the-future-of-smart-grid-technologies

DoT briefing on Phoenix passive detection system
https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/2024-11/City%20of%20Phoenix_508.pdf

South Side Weekly article on the failings of ShotSpotter
https://southsideweekly.com/shotspotter-routinely-missed-reported-shootings-city-data-shows/